* Table of contents
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: table-of-contents
  :END:

1.  [[#introduction][Introduction]]
2.  [[#readings][Readings and Additional Resources]]
3.  [[#autonomous][Autonomous Systems and Internet Interconnection]]
4.  [[#business][AS Business Relationships]]
5.  [[#bgp][BGP Routing Policies: Importing and Exporting Routes]]
6.  [[#design][BGP and Design Goals]]
7.  [[#ibgp][iBGP and eBGP]]
8.  [[#decision][BGP Decision Process: Selecting Routes at a Router]]
9.  [[#challenges][Challenges with BGP: Scalability and
    Misconfigurations]]
10. [[#peering][Peering at IXPs]]
11. [[#route][Peering at IXPs: How Does a Route Server Work?]]

* Introduction
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: introduction
  :END:

In the previous lecture, we learned about the protocols we have in place
so that data can be routed within a network. But how does data travel
between networks? We know that the Internet is an ecosystem consisting
of thousands of independently operated networks. Each of these networks
operate in their own interest and they have independent economic and
traffic engineering objectives, and yet they must interconnect to
provide global connectivity. In this lecture we learn about the Border
Gateway Protocol (BGP), which provides the glue for this connectivity.
We will also learn about the different types of interconnections that
are based on different business relationships between networks. Finally,
we learn about increasingly popular infrastructures called *Internet
Exchange Points*, which primarily provide interconnection services so
that the participant networks can directly exchange traffic with each
other.

* Readings and Additional Resources
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: readings
  :END:

*Important Readings:*

/Interdomain Internet Routing/

http://web.mit.edu/6.829/www/currentsemester/papers/AS-bgp-notes.pdf
(Links to an external site.)

/BGP routing policies in ISP networks/

https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~jrex/papers/policies.pdf (Links to an
external site.)

/On the importance of Internet eXchange Points for today's Internet
ecosystem/

https://cryptome.wikileaks.org/2013/07/ixp-importance.pdf

/Peering at Peerings: On the Role of IXP Route Servers/

https://people.csail.mit.edu/richterp/imc238-richterA.pdf

$\medskip$

*Books references:*

If you have access to the Kurose-Ross book and to the Peterson book,
below you can find the list of the chapters we have as a reference in
this lecture. As we have mentioned in the course schedule, purchasing
the books is not required.

Kurose-Ross, 6th Edition, Section 1.3.3

Kurose-Ross 6th Edition, Section 4.6.3

$\medskip$

*Optional Readings:*

/Investigating Interdomain Routing Policies in the Wild/

https://people.cs.umass.edu/~phillipa/papers/AnwarIMC15.pdf (Links to an
external site.)

/BGP Communities: Even more Worms in the Routing Can/

https://people.mpi-inf.mpg.de/~fstreibelt/preprint/communities-imc2018.pdf
(Links to an external site.)

/On the scalability of BGP: the roles of topology growth and update
rate-limiting/

https://www.cc.gatech.edu/home/dovrolis/Papers/bgp-scale-conext08.pdf
(Links to an external site.)

/O Peer, Where Art Thou? Uncovering Remote Peering Interconnections at
IXPs/

https://www.inspire.edu.gr/wp-content/pdfs/uncovering_remote_peering_interconnections_v1.pdf
(Links to an external site.)

/Detecting BGP Configuration Faults with Static Analysis/

https://www.usenix.org/legacy/events/nsdi05/tech/feamster/feamster.pdf

* Autonomous Systems and Internet Interconnection
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: autonomous
  :END:

*The Internet is a complex ecosystem.* Today's Internet is a complex
ecosystem that is built of a network of networks. The basis of this
ecosystem includes Internet Service Providers (ISPs), Internet Exchange
Points (IXPs), and Content Delivery Networks (CDNs).

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_autonomous_1.png]]

Let's talk more about each type of these networks: First, ISPs can be
categorized into three tiers or types: access ISPs (or Tier-3), regional
ISPs (or Tier-2) and large global scale ISPs (or Tier-1). There are a
dozen large-scale Tier-1 ISPs that operate at a global scale and
essentially form the "backbone" network over which smaller networks can
connect. Some example Tier-1 ISPs include AT&T, NTT, Level-3, and
Sprint. In turn, regional ISPs connect to Tier-1 ISPs, and smaller
access ISPs connect to regional ISPs.

Second, IXPs are interconnection infrastructures that provide the
physical infrastructure where multiple networks (e.g., ISPs and CDNs)
can interconnect and exchange traffic locally. As of 2019, there are
approximately 500 IXPs around the world.

Third, CDNs are networks that are created by content providers with the
goal of having greater control over how content is delivered to the
end-users, and also to reduce connectivity costs. Some example CDNs
include Google and Netflix. These networks have multiple data centers,
and each one may house hundreds of servers that are distributed across
the world.

*Competition and cooperation among networks.* This ecosystem we just
described, forms a hierarchical structure, since smaller networks (e.g.,
access ISPs) connect to larger networks (e.g., Tier-3 ISPs). In other
words, an access ISP receives Internet connectivity becoming the
customer of a larger ISP. In this case, the larger ISP becomes the
provider of the smaller ISP. This leads to competition at every level of
the hierarchy. For example, Tier-1 ISPs compete with each other, and the
same is true for regional ISPs, which compete with each other as well.
But, at the same time, competing ISPs need to cooperate to provide
global connectivity to their respective customer networks. ISPs deploy
multiple interconnection strategies depending on the number of customers
in their network and also the geographical location of these networks.

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_autonomous_2.png]]

*More interconnection options in the Internet ecosystem.* To complete
the picture of today's Internet interconnection ecosystem, we note that
ISPs may also connect through Points of Presence (PoPs), multihoming and
peering. PoPs are one (or more) routers in a provider's network, which
can be used by a customer network to connect to that provider. Also, an
ISP may choose to multi-home by connecting to one or more provider
networks. Finally, with peering, two ISPs may choose to connect through
a settlement-free agreement where neither network pays the other to send
traffic to one another directly.

*The Internet topology: hierarchical vs flat.* As we said, this
ecosystem we just described forms a hierarchical structure, especially
in the earlier days of the Internet. However, it's important to note
that as the Internet has been evolving, and especially with the dominant
presence of IXPs and CDNs, the structure has been morphing from
hierarchical to flat.

*Autonomous Systems.* Each of the types of networks that we talked about
above (e.g., ISPs and CDNs) may operate as an Autonomous System (AS). An
AS is a group of routers (including the links among them) that operate
under the same administrative authority. An ISP, for example, may
operate as a single AS or it may operate through multiple ASes. Each AS
implements its own set of policies, makes its own traffic engineering
decisions and interconnection strategies, and also determines how the
traffic leaves and enters the network.

*Protocols for routing traffic between and within ASes.* The border
routers of the ASes use the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) to exchange
routing information with one another. In contrast, the Internal Gateway
Protocols (IGPs), operate within an AS and they are focused on
"optimizing a path metric" within that network. Example IGPs include
Open Shortest Paths First (OSPF), Intermediate System - Intermediate
System (IS-IS), Routing Information Protocol (RIP), E-IGRP. In this
lesson, we will focus on BGP.

* AS Business Relationships
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: business
  :END:

In this topic, we will talk about the prevalent forms of business
relationships between ASes:

1. *Provider-Customer relationship (or transit).* This relationship is
   based on a financial settlement, which determines how much the
   customer will pay the provider, so the provider forwards the
   customer's traffic to destinations found in the provider's routing
   table (including the opposite direction of the traffic as well).
2. *Peering relationship.* In a peering relationship, two ASes share
   access to a subset of each other's routing tables. The routes that
   are shared between two peers are often restricted to the respective
   customers of each one. The agreement holds provided that the traffic
   exchanged between the two peers is not highly asymmetric. Peering
   relationships are formed between not only Tier-1 ISPs, but also
   between smaller ISPs. In the case of Tier-1 ISPs, the two peers need
   to be of similar size and handle similar amounts of traffic.
   Otherwise, the larger ISP would lack the incentive to enter a peering
   relationship with a smaller size ISP. In the case of peering between
   two smaller size ISPs, the incentive they both have is to save the
   money they would pay their providers by directly forwarding to each
   other their traffic, provided that there is a significant amount of
   traffic that is destined for each other (or each other's customers).

*How do providers charge customers?*

While peering allows networks to get their traffic forwarded without
cost, provider ASes have a financial incentive to forward as much of
their customers' traffic as possible. One major factor that determines a
provider's revenue is the data rate of an interconnection. A provider
usually charges in one of two ways:

1. Based on a fixed price given that the bandwidth used is within a
   predefined range.
2. Based on the bandwidth used. The bandwidth usage is calculated based
   on periodic measurements, e.g., on five min intervals. The provider
   then charges by taking the 95th percentile of the distribution of the
   measurements.

Sometimes in practice, we observe complex routing policies. In some
cases, the driving force behind these policies is to increase the amount
of traffic from a customer to its provider, and therefore increase the
providers' revenue.

* BGP Routing Policies: Importing and Exporting Routes
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: bgp
  :END:

In the previous topic, we talked about AS business relationships. AS
business relationships drive an AS' routing policies and influence which
routes an AS needs to import or export. In this topic, we will talk
about why it matters which routes an AS imports/exports.

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_bgp_1.png]]

*Exporting Routes*

Deciding which routes to export is an important decision with business
and financial implications. This is the case because, advertising a
route for a destination to a neighboring AS, means that this route may
be selected by that AS and traffic will start to flow through. Deciding
which routes to advertise is a policy decision and it is implemented
through route filters; route filters are essentially rules that
determine which routes an AS will advertise to other neighboring ASes.

Let's look at the different types of routes that an AS (let's call it X)
decides whether to export:

- *Routes learned from customers.* These are the routes that X receives
  as advertisements from its customers. Since provider X is getting paid
  to provide reachability to a customer AS, it makes sense that X wants
  to advertise these customer routes to as many other neighboring ASes
  as possible. This will likely cause more traffic towards the customer
  (through X) and hence more revenue to X.
- *Routes learned from providers.* These are the routes that X receives
  as advertisements from its providers. Advertising these routes doesn't
  make sense, since X does not have the financial incentive to carry
  traffic for its provider's routes. These routes are withheld from X's
  peers and X's other providers, but they are advertised to X's
  customers.
- *Routes learned from peers.* These are routes that X receives as
  advertisements from its peers. As we saw earlier, it doesn't make
  sense for X to advertise to a provider A the routes that it receives
  from another provider B. Because in that case, these providers A and B
  are going to use X to reach the advertised destinations without X
  making revenue. The same is true for the routes that X learns from
  peers.

*Importing Routes*

Similarly as exporting, ASes are selective about which routes to import,
based primarily on which neighboring AS advertises them and what type of
business relationship is established. An AS receives route
advertisements from its customers, providers and peers.

When an AS receives multiple route advertisements towards the same
destination, from multiple ASes, then it needs to rank the routes before
selecting which one to import. The routes that are preferred first are
the customer routes, then the peer routes and finally the provider
routes. The reasoning behind this ranking is that an AS...

1. wants to ensure that routes towards its customers do not traverse
   other ASes unnecessarily generating costs,
2. uses routes learned from peers since these are usually "free" (under
   the peering agreement),
3. and finally resorts to import routes learned from providers as these
   will add to costs.

* BGP and Design Goals
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: design
  :END:

In the previous topics, we talked about importing and exporting routes.
In the following topics, we will learn how the default routing
protocol - Border Routing Protocol or BGP - is used to implement routing
policies. Let's first start with the design goals of the BGP protocol:

*Scalability:* As the size of the Internet grows, the same is true for
the number of ASes, the number of prefixes in the routing tables, the
network churn, and the BGP traffic exchanged between routers. One of the
design goals of BGP is to manage the complications of this growth, while
achieving convergence in reasonable timescales and providing loop-free
paths.

*Express routing policies:* BGP has defined route attributes that allow
ASes to implement policies (which routes to import and export), through
route filtering and route ranking. Each ASes routing decisions can be
kept confidential, and each AS can implement them independently of one
another.

*Allow cooperation among ASes:* Each individual AS can still make local
decisions (which routes to import and export) while keeping these
decisions confidential from other ASes.

*Security:* was not included in the original design goals for BGP. But
as the complexity and size of the Internet has been increasing, so has
the need to provide security measures. We notice an increasing need for
protection against malicious attacks, misconfigurations or faults, but
also their early detection. These vulnerabilities still cause routing
disruptions and connectivity issues for individual hosts, networks and
sometimes even entire countries. There have been several efforts to
enhance BGP security ranging from protocols (e.g., S-BGP), additional
infrastructure (e.g., registries to maintain up-to-date information
about which ASes own which prefixes ASes), public keys for ASes, etc.
Also, there has been extensive research work to develop machine learning
based approaches and systems. But these solutions have not been widely
deployed or adopted due to multiple reasons that include difficulties to
transition to new protocols and lack of incentives.

* BGP Protocol Basics
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: basics
  :END:

In this topic, we will review some of the basics of the BGP protocol.

*BGP session.* A pair of routers, known as *BGP peers*, exchange routing
information over a semi-permanent TCP port connection called a *BGP
session*. To begin a BGP session a router will send an OPEN message to
another router. Then the sending and receiving router will send each
other announcements from their individual routing tables. Depending on
the number of routes being exchanged, this can take from seconds up to
several minutes.

A BGP session between a pair of routers in two different ASes is called
*external BGP (eBGP)* session, and a BGP session between routers that
belong to the same AS is called *internal BGP (iBGP)* session.

In the following diagram, we can see 3 different ASes along with iBGP
(e.g., between 3c and 3a) and eBGP (e.g., between 3a and 1c) sessions
between their border routers.

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_basics_1.png]]

*BGP messages.* After a session is established between BGP peers, the
peers can exchange BGP messages to provide reachability information and
enforce routing policies. We have two types of BGP messages:

1. UPDATE

- Announcements: These messages advertise new routes and updates to
  existing routes. They include several standardized attributes.
- Withdrawals: These messages are sent when a previously announced route
  is removed. This could be due to some failure or due to a change in
  the routing policy.

2. KEEPALIVE: These messages are exchanged to keep a current session
   going.

*BGP prefix reachability.* In the BGP protocol, destinations are
represented by IP Prefixes. Each prefix represents a subnet or a
collection of subnets that an AS can reach. Gateway routers running eBGP
advertise the IP Prefixes they can reach according to the AS's specific
export policy to routers in neighboring ASes. Then, using separate iBGP
sessions, the gateway routers disseminate these routes for external
destinations to other internal routers according to the AS's import
policy. Internal routers run iBGP to propagate the external routes to
other internal iBGP speaking routers.

*Path Attributes and BGP Routes.* In addition to the reachable IP prefix
field, advertised BGP routes consist of a number of BGP attributes. Two
notable attributes are AS-PATH and NEXT-HOP.

- AS-PATH. Each AS, as identified by the AS's autonomous system number
  (ASN), that the route passes through is included in the AS-PATH. This
  attribute is used to prevent loops and to choose between multiple
  routes to the same destination, the route with the shortest path.
- NEXT-HOP. This attribute refers to the IP address (interface) of the
  next-hop router along the path towards the destination. Internal
  routers use the field to store the IP address of the border router.
  Internal BGP routers will have to forward all traffic bound for
  external destinations through the border router. If there is more than
  one such router on network and each advertises a path to the same
  external destination, NEXT-HOP allows the internal router to store in
  the forwarding table the best path according to the AS routing policy.

* iBGP and eBGP
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: ibgp
  :END:

In the previous topic we saw that we have two flavors of BGP: eBGP (for
sessions between border routers of neighboring ASes) and iBGP (for
sessions between internal routers of the same AS). Both protocols are
used to disseminate routes for external destinations.

The eBGP speaking routers learn routes to external prefixes and they
disseminate them to all routers within the AS. This dissemination is
happening with iBGP sessions. For example, as we see in the figure
below, the border routers of AS1, AS2, and AS3 establish eBGP sessions
to learn external routes. Inside AS2, these routes are disseminated
using iBGP sessions.

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_ibgp_1.png]]

Also, we note that the dissemination of routes within the AS is done by
establishing a full mesh of iBGP sessions between the internal routers.
Each eBGP speaking router has an iBGP session with every other BGP
router in the AS, so that it can send updates about the routes it learns
(over eBGP).

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_ibgp_2.png]]

Finally, we note that iBGP is not another IGP-like protocol (e.g., RIP
or OSPF). IGP-like protocols are used to establish paths between the
internal routers of an AS based on specific costs within the AS. In
contrast, iBGP is only used to disseminate external routes within the
AS.

* BGP Decision Process: Selecting Routes at a Router
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: decision
  :END:

As we already discussed in earlier topics, ASes are operated and managed
by different administrative authorities, and they can operate with
different business goals and network conditions (e.g., volumes of
traffic). Of course, all these factors can affect the BGP policies for
each AS independently.

Still, routers follow the same process to select routes. Let's zoom into
what is happening as the routers exchange BGP messages to select routes.

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_decision_1.png]]

Conceptually, we can consider the model of a router as in the figure
above. A router receives incoming BGP messages and processes them. When
a router receives advertisements, first it applies the import policies
to exclude routes entirely from further consideration.

Then the router implements the decision process to select the best
routes that reflect the policy in place. The new selected routes are
installed in the forwarding table. Finally, the router decides which
neighbors to export the route to, by applying the export policy.

*The router's decision process.*

Let's take a look at the router's decision process. Suppose that a
router receives multiple route advertisements to the same destination.
How does the router choose which route to import? In a nutshell, the
decision process is how the router compares routes, by going through the
list of attributes in the route advertisements. In the simplest
scenario, where there is no policy in place (meaning it doesn't matter
which route will be imported), the router uses the attribute of the
pathlength to select the route with the fewest number of hops. But in
practice, this simple scenario is rarely the case.

A router compares a pair of routes, by going through the list of
attributes - as shown in the figure below. For each attribute, it
selects the route with the attribute value that will help apply the
policy. If for a specific attribute, the values are the same, then it
goes to the next attribute.

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_decision_2.png]]

Let's focus on two attributes, LocalPref and MED (Multi-Exit
Discriminator), and let's see how we can use them to influence the
decision process.

*Influencing the route decision using the LocalPref.* The LocalPref
attribute is used to prefer routes learned through a specific AS over
other ASes. For example, suppose AS B learns of a route to the same
destination x via A and C. If B prefers to route its traffic through A,
due to peering or business, it can assign a higher LocalPref value to
routes it learns from A. And therefore, by using LocalPref, AS B can
control where the traffic exits the AS. In other words, it will
influence which routers will be selected as exit points for the traffic
that leaves the AS (outbound traffic).

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_decision_3.png]]

As we saw earlier in this lesson, an AS ranks the routes it learns by
preferring first the routes learned from its customers, then the routes
learned from its peers and finally the routes learned from its
providers. An operator can assign a non-overlapping range of values to
the LocalPref attribute according to the type of relationship. So
assigning different LocalPref ranges will influence which routes are
imported. For example, there may be the following scheme in place, to
reflect the business relationships:

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_decision_4.png]]

*Influencing the route decision using the MED attribute.* The MED
(Mutli-Exit Discriminator) value is used by ASes connected by multiple
links to designate which of those links are preferred for inbound
traffic. For example, the network operator of AS B will assign different
MED values to its routes advertised to AS A through R1 and different MED
values to its routes advertised through R2. As a result of different MED
values for the same routes, AS A will be influenced to choose R1 to
forward traffic to AS B, if R1 has lower MED value, and if all other
attributes are equal.

We have seen in the previous topics that an AS does not have an economic
incentive to export routes that it learns from providers or peers to
other providers or peers. An AS can reflect this by tagging routes with
a MED value to "staple" the type of business relationship. Also, an AS
filters routes with specific MED values before exporting them to other
ASes. We note that influencing the route exports will also affect how
the traffic enters an AS (the routers that are entry points for the
traffic that enters the AS).

*So, where/how are the attributes controlled?* The attributes are set
either: a) locally by the AS (e.g., LocalPref), b) by the neighboring AS
(eg MED), or c) they are set by the protocol (e.g., if a route is
learned through eBGP or iBGP).

* Challenges with BGP: Scalability and Misconfigurations
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: challenges
  :END:

Unfortunately, the BGP protocol in practice can suffer from two major
limitations: misconfigurations and faults. A possible misconfiguration
or an error can result in an excessively large number of updates which
in turn can result in route instability, router processor and memory
overloading, outages, and router failures.

One way that ASes can help to reduce the risk that these events will
happen is by limiting the routing table size and also by limiting the
number of route changes.

An AS can limit the routing table size using filtering. For example,
long (very specific) prefixes can be filtered to encourage route
aggregation. Routers can limit the number of prefixes that are
advertised from a single source on a per-session basis. Some small ASes
also have the option to configure *default routes* into their forwarding
tables. ASes can likewise protect other ASes by using route aggregation
and exporting less specific prefixes where possible.

Also, an AS can limit the number of routing changes, specifically
limiting the propagation of unstable routes, by using a mechanism known
as *flap damping*. To apply this technique, an AS will track the number
of updates to a specific prefix over a certain amount of time. If the
tracked value reaches a configurable value, the AS can suppress that
route until a later time. Because this can affect reachability, an AS
can be strategic about how it uses this technique for certain prefixes.
For example, more specific prefixes could be more aggressively
suppressed (lower thresholds), while routes to known destinations that
require high availability could be allowed higher thresholds.

* Peering at IXPs
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: peering
  :END:

In the previous topics we talked about ASes' business relationships.
ASes can either peer with one another directly or they can peer at
Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) which are infrastructures that
facilitate peering but also provide more services.

*What are IXPs?*

IXPs are physical infrastructures that provide the means for ASes to
interconnect and directly exchange traffic with one another. The ASes
that interconnect at an IXP are called participant ASes. The physical
infrastructure of an IXP is usually a network of switches that are
located either in the same physical location, or they can be distributed
over a region or even at a global scale. Typically, the infrastructure
has fully redundant switching fabric that provides fault-tolerance, and
the equipment is usually located in facilities such as data centers to
provide reliability, sufficient power and physical security.

For example, in the figure below we see an IXP infrastructure (2012),
called DE-CIX that is located in Frankfurt, Germany. The figure shows
the core of the infrastructure (noted as 3 and 6) and additional sites
(1-4 and 7) that are located at different colocation facilities in the
area.

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_peering_1.png]]

Why have IXPs become increasingly popular and are important to study?
Some of the most important reasons include:

1. IXPs are interconnection hubs handling large traffic volumes: A 2012
   study by Ager et al. analyzed a large European IXP and showed the
   presence of more than 50,000 actively used peering links! For some
   large IXPs (mostly located in Europe), the daily traffic volume is
   comparable to the traffic volume handled by global Tier 1 ISPs.
2. Important role in mitigating DDoS attacks: As IXPs have become
   increasingly popular interconnection hubs, they are able to observe
   the traffic to/from an increasing number of participant ASes. In this
   role, IXPs can play the role of a "shield" to mitigate DDoS attacks
   and stop the DDoS traffic before it hits a participant AS. There are
   a plethora of DDoS events that have been mitigated by IXPs. For
   example, back in March 2013, a huge DDoS attack took place that
   involved Spamhaus, Stophaus, and CloudFare. At the lecture on
   Security, we will look into specific techniques that IXPs have to
   mitigate DDoS based on BGP blackholing.
3. "Real-world" infrastructures with a plethora of research
   opportunities: IXPs play an important role in today's Internet
   infrastructure. Studying this peering ecosystem, the end-to-end flow
   of network traffic, and the traffic that traverses these facilities
   can help us understand how the Internet landscape is changing. IXPs
   also provide an excellent "research playground" for multiple
   applications. Such as security applications. For example BGP
   blackholing for DDoS mitigation, or applications for Software Defined
   Networking.
4. IXPs are active marketplaces and technology innovation hubs: IXPs are
   active marketplaces, especially in North America and Europe. They
   provide an expanding plethora of services that go beyond
   interconnection, for example DDoS mitigation, or SDN-based services.
   IXPs have been evolving from interconnection hubs to technology
   innovation hubs.

*What are the steps for an AS to peer at an IXP?*

Each participating network must have a public Autonomous System Number
(ASN). Each participant brings a router to the IXP facility (or one of
its locations in case the IXP has an infrastructure distributed across
multiple data centers) and connects one of its ports to the IXP switch.
The router of each participant must be able to run BGP since the
exchange of routes across the IXP is via BGP only. Each participant has
to agree to the IXP's General Terms and Conditions (GTC).

Thus, for two networks to publicly peer at an IXP (i.e., use the IXP's
network infrastructure to establish a connection for exchanging traffic
according to their own requirements and business relationships), they
each incur a one-time cost for establishing a circuit from their
premises to the IXP, a monthly charge for using a chosen IXP port
(higher port speeds are more expensive), and possibly an annual fee for
membership to the entity that owns and operates the IXP. In particular,
exchanging traffic over an established public peering link at an IXP is
in principle "settlement-free" (i.e., involves no from of payment
between the two parties) as IXPs typically do not charge for exchanged
traffic volume. Moreover, IXPs typically do not interfere with the
bilateral relationships that exist between the IXP's participants,
unless they are in violation of the GTC. For example, the two parties of
an existing IXP peering link are free to use that link in ways that
involve paid peering, or some networks may even offer transit across an
IXP's switching fabric. Depending on the IXP, the time it takes to
establish a public peering link can range from a few days to a couple of
weeks.

*Why networks choose to peer at IXPs?*

- Keeping local traffic local. In other words, the traffic that is
  exchanged between two networks does not need to travel unnecessarily
  through other networks if both networks are participants in the same
  IXP facility.
- Lower costs. Typically peering at an IXP is offered at lowered cost
  than, e.g., relying on third-parties to transfer the traffic charging
  based on volume.
- Improved network performance due to reduced delay.
- Incentives. Critical players in today's Internet ecosystem often
  "incentivize" other networks to connect at IXPs. For example, a big
  content provider may require another network to be present at a
  specific IXP(s) in order to peer with them.

*Now, let's take a look at the services that IXPs provide:*

1. Public peering: The most well-known use of IXPs is public peering
   service - in which two networks use the IXP's network infrastructure
   to establish a connection to exchange traffic based on their
   bilateral relations and traffic requirements. The costs required to
   set up this connection are - one-time cost for establishing the
   connection, monthly charge for using the chosen IXP port (those with
   higher speeds are more expensive) and perhaps an annual fee of
   membership in the entity owning and operating the IXP. However, the
   IXPs do not usually charge based on the amount of exchanged volume.
   They also do not usually interfere with bilateral relations between
   the participants unless there is a violation of the GTC. Even with
   the set-up costs, IXPs are usually cheaper than other conventional
   methods of exchanging traffic (such as relying on third parties which
   charge based on the volume of exchanged traffic). IXP participants
   also often experience better network performance and QoS because of
   reduced delays and routing efficiencies. In addition, many companies
   that are major players in the Internet space (such as Google)
   incentivize other networks to connect at IXPs by making it a
   requirement to peering with them.
2. Private peering: Most operational IXPs also provide a private peering
   service (Private Interconnects - PIs) that allow direct traffic
   exchange between two parties of a PI and don't use the IXP's public
   peering infrastructure. This is commonly used when the participants
   want a well-provisioned dedicated link capable of handling
   high-volume, bidirectional and relatively stable traffic.
3. Route servers and Service level agreements: Many IXPs also include
   service level agreements (SLAs) and free use of the IXP's route
   servers for participants. This allows participants to arrange instant
   peering with a large number of co-located participant networks using
   essentially a single agreement/BGP session.
4. Remote peering through resellers: Another popular service is IXP
   reseller/partner programs. This allows third parties to resell IXP
   ports wherever they have infrastructure connected to the IXP. These
   third parties are allowed to offer the IXP's service remotely, which
   allows networks that have little traffic to also use the IXP. This
   also enables remote peering - networks in distant geographic areas
   can use the IXP.
5. Mobile peering: Some IXPs also provide support for mobile peering - a
   scalable solution for interconnection of mobile GPRS/3G networks.
6. DDoS blackholing: A few IXPs provide support for customer-triggered
   blackholing, which allows users to alleviate the effects of DDoS
   attacks against their network.
7. Free value-added services: In the interest of "good of the Internet",
   a few IXPs such as Scandinavian IXP Netnod offer free value-added
   services like Internet Routing Registry (IRR), consumer broadband
   speed tests9, DNS root name servers, country-code top-level domain
   (ccTLD) nameservers, as well as distribution of the official local
   time through NTP.

* Peering at IXPs: How Does a Route Server Work?
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: route
  :END:

Generally, the manner in which two ASes exchange traffic through the
switching fabric was utilizing a two-way BGP session, called a
*bilateral* BGP session. Since there has been an increasing number of
ASes peering at an IXP, we have another challenge to accommodate an
increasing number of BGP sessions. Obviously this option does not scale
with a large number of participants. To mitigate this, some IXPs operate
a route server, which helps make peering more manageable. In summary, a
Route Server (RS):

- Collects and shares routing information from its peers or participants
  that connects with (i.e., IXP members that connect to the RS).
- Executes its own BGP decision process and also re-advertise the
  resulting information (i.e., best route selection) to all RS's peer
  routers.

The figure below shows a *multi-lateral BGP peering session*, which is
essentially an RS that facilitates and manages how multiple ASes can
"talk" on the control plane simultaneously.

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_route_1.png]]

*How does a route server (RS) maintain multi-lateral peering sessions?*

Let's look at a modern RS architecture in the figure below to understand
how RSes work. A typical routing daemon maintains a Routing Information
Base (RIB), which contains all BGP paths that it receives from its
peers - the Master RIB. The router server also maintains AS-specific
RIBs to keep track of the individual BGP sessions they maintain with
each participant AS.

RSes maintain two types of route filters: a) *Import filters* are
applied to ensure that each member AS only advertises routes that it
should advertise, b) *Export filters* which are typically triggered by
the IXP members themselves to restrict the set of other IXP member ASes
that receive their routes. Let's look at an example where AS X and AS Z
exchange routes through a multi-lateral peering sessions that the route
server holds.

Steps:

1. In the first step, AS X advertises a prefix p1 to the RS, which is
   added to the route server's AS X specific RIB.
2. The route server uses the peer-specific import filter, to check
   whether AS X is allowed to advertise p1. If it passes the filter, the
   prefix p1 is added to the Master RIB.
3. The route server applies the peer-specific export filter to check if
   AS X allows AS Z to receive p1, and if true it adds that route to the
   AS Z-specific RIB.
4. Now, RS advertises p1 to AS Z with AS X as the next hop.

#+CAPTION: image
[[./MD_figures/4_route_2.png]]
